♪ [music] ♪
The last thing we need to nail before we
can get building this sucker is the
concept of middleware. Now, middleware is
fairly fundamental to Express.
It's how almost all Express plugins are
working, so it's pretty important that at
least we get an introduction to it here,
and then we'll be coming back to it over
and over throughout this entire
course. So what is middleware?
Well, if we look at our method here,
homePage, you know we have a request and
you know we have a response. So request is
the data that sort of comes in,
and the response is the data that goes
out. Now, in between the request and the
response, sometimes a bunch of work needs
to happen. You might need to call the
database, you might need to do some data
normalization. So any work that needs to
happen along the way, of course it could
happen inside of the homePage,
but if I were, say, uploading a file, I
might write in middleware to handle the
uploading of the file, and to
rename the file, and to resize it,
because I don't want to associate that
code just with the homePage.
Because uploading a file code could happen
on any specific page.
So what we can do, if we take a look at
this diagram that I have,
you see we start with our request and we
end with displaying a profile or
displaying a login. So like, let's assume
that somebody is trying to login to a form
tag with a POST request, and at the end of
the day, they either are logged in,
we show them their account, or they are
not logged in, and we show them an error
and we redirect them to the login page.
But in between the request,
the beginning, and the response, the end,
we need to do a whole bunch of stuff.
So we might, first of all, do something
called a bodyParser, which is some
middleware we're using in our app.js.
We'll look at it in just a second,
and what that will do is, when somebody
POSTs a form, it will make the form field,
email and password,
available to us on the request.
That doesn't happen by default, but the
bodyParser is going to take the data from
the request and make them into nice
properties on our req.body.
Then we'll call something called next,
which is essentially like,
"Done with this middleware, on to the next
one." And then maybe we'll have a function
called emailNormailze where, you know,
sometimes people try to login with,
like, mixed case and spaces, and maybe
your database needs no spaces and all
lowercase. So what do you do? You take the
req.body.email that the bodyParser gave
you in the last function, and we'll trim
it and lowercase it so that we know that
it's nice and clean data. Now, the
req.body.email is in a situation where we
can start calling a database. Then we call
next, because we're done with that piece
of middleware. We'll move on to
authorizeUser, and auth middleware is
going to lookup the user, it's going to
check that the password is correct,
it's going to check that they're actually
a user, and if that is true,
then it's going to put the user's
information on the request object.
So you sort of see how the request is
going through, like, an assembly line of
different middlewares, and as we go along
we just start tacking stuff that we might
need down the road onto the request
object. That's sort of the catch-all,
that's how we put data into an object in
order to get it somewhere down the line.
So in here, if I was valid logged in, then
the next middleware would kick in,
which is displayProfile. Otherwise, we
would an hit an invalid,
we would catch that error, we're going to
look at that when we display the login,
where we do something called flashing and
redirect them.
So if we take a look at our
storeController here, what we could do is,
we could say exports.myMiddleware = (req,
res,
and now, if you are writing middleware,
you need to pass the next),
and I'll show you why. So we'll do an
arrow function here,
and then on this, we'll just say req.name
= 'Wes' and then we'll call next.
And what next will do is say, "Okay, I've
done my work in this middleware,
pass it off to the next piece." And then
we have our homePage.
So how do we use that then? We'll go back
our routes, and now our routes are saying,
"When someone visits forward slash, pass
them to the homePage." But now we're going
to say, "When somebody gets to the forward
slash, pass them to..." What did we call
it here? myMiddleware, and then we pass it
as a next parameter,
we pass it homePage. And because this
myMiddleware here will call .next,
then it will just pass it on to the next
function that is in line.
You could handle the response right inside
of myMiddleware, maybe there was an error
and we could redirect them to a different
page, but in this case,
we're calling next, which is going to pass
it to the next one down the road.
So if I give this a save now and I were to
go into our storeController,
I could go into my homePage and
console.log(req.name).
And I should be able to see 'Wes' because
it's been set in a previous middleware as
we go. So let's open up our terminal here,
let's clear it out,
and I've refreshed the page, and I now see
Wes. Even though these are two separate
functions, I've sort of passed it
downstream by putting it on the request
object. So middleware is something that
will allow you to dip in.
It's sort of like in React, we have
lifecycle hooks, where you can hook in at
any point in time. Middleware allows us to
run code after the request but before the
response actually happens. So that's an
example of route-specific middleware,
however Express also has global
middlewares, where every single request
that goes through the application will run
through the middleware,
before it even gets to your router, it's
going to run through some middleware.
And that's generally where we introduce
any application wide functionality,
or features, or plugins, or anything that
needs to happen like that.
And where does that happen? Well, that's
what most of app.js is,
and if you're looking at this and thinking
there's a lot of setup code,
this is where we start to break it down.
So let's go and open up our app.js here,
and we will take a look. Anywhere you see
app.use, what that means is that we are
using this global middleware. So even
before we get to our routes,
we are going to run all
of these middlewares.
So we have app.use(express.static. What
does that mean? Well, that means that we
have a folder here, called public, and we
have images, and we have sass,
and we have uploads, and all kinds of
stuff that goes in these folders,
and if somebody requests anything from the
public folder, it's just going to serve up
that actual image before it even tries to
think if it's a route or not.
Because if you look for dog.jpeg, it's not
going to go in here and look for dog.jpeg.
It will know, because it's in the public
folder, just give them the file that
they're looking for. Next one is
bodyParser.json and the
bodyParser.urlencoded. That means that
anytime somebody submits data via a form
tag what will happen is that you will get
that data that has been submitted on your
req.body and it's all going to be url
encoded, and you don't have to worry about
dissecting it from the request at all.
It's just going to be, if someone submits
a form with a name, and email, and a
password, you're going to have three
properties called name,
email, and password.
And the bodyParser makes that, that's part
of Express' bodyParser package.
So Express doesn't come with it built in,
but they maintain it and you can add it in
should you need that. Then we have
something called expressValidator,
which is going to validate any sort of
email stuff. We'll be looking at that when
we get more into submitting forms and
logging in. Then we have a cookieParser.
So by default Express doesn't do anything
with cookies, but if you want to set
cookies, you can, because by using the
cookieParser middleware it will then give
you req.cookies, and we're going to need
that to be working with our log in
sessions. But what you could do is, you
could go to your middleware here in our
storeController.
We can say res.cookie and we could set a
name cookie to be 'Wes is cool' and you
want to set that...there's some options in
here like maxAge, how long the cookie
would be valid for. And now, if I refresh
this page and open up my DevTools here to
our Application tab and look at Cookies,
you'll see that there,
name cookie is now set to 'Wes is cool. '
And there's also one called sweetsesh,
which we'll talk about in just a second.
So that's what the cookie middleware will
allow us to do if you ever need to set
cookies. We don't directly use that,
but using sessions in our application, we
will. If we keep going along,
here's the session part. So what sessions
will allow us to do is to store data on
our visitors, their logged in state, how
long they've been logged in,
any information that you need to go from
request to request, that's going to be
stored in our session.
So we use that to set up, and we'll go
more into that once we start talking about
it. Sessions are stored in our MongoDB
database, and then we have our passport.
We'll talk more about that when we do
login, we'll talk more about flashing once
we get into logging in and
showing status of logged in or not.
This middleware will give us all of our
local helpers, that's what allows us to
get that H variable that we used a little
bit earlier. Then after all that above
middleware, we finally inject
our own routes.
So we say app.use('/', so anything that
comes after the forward slash,
use our routes file. And then our routes
files exports our router,
which will then handle the individual
forward slash routes that are needed.
So that's why we have that here, and then
after, you're actually going to see a
couple more middlewares after the routes,
because if something goes wrong in this
route, what happens? Remember how all of
the stuff is sequential,
right? Above it we do all the cookie
stuff, and the helpers, and the flashing,
and our sessions, and our bodyParser. That
all need to happen before we hit a route,
then we do all of our url routes, but if
something happens here,
we need some stuff after the fact to sort
of like be a safety net,
and those are called error handlers. So
first we say if there was no route here
found, then it's just going to keep moving
on to the next middleware.
You see how we sort of queued
up these middlewares?
If nothing is found in here, like if I go
to /nope, what happens?
We hit a 404, and that's when the notFound
middleware, and I've put these in their
own file, if we open up errorHandlers. And
don't worry if this doesn't make a whole
lot of sense just yet, I just kind of want
to give you an idea,
and then as we learn in this application,
you'll get a better idea.
So we have a notFound, which is simply
just a middleware that will make a new
error, and then it'll set the error status
to 404 and then call next.
But if you pass next something, it will
assume that what you are passing it is an
error. So we set a little bit of
information about what error happened,
and we pass it along, which was here, and
then the next one. So if we're in
development, we're going to handle
development errors, which will show us
what's called a stack trace, all the
information about what happened,
but if we are in production, we don't want
to show the user, "Oh,
there was an error that happened on this
line of code."
You just want to say, "Oops. Something
went wrong," and handle that internally,
so that will happen with production
errors. So it's sort of this like this
Plinko machine, where you put a request in
at the top and it just filters its way all
the way through all of these middlewares,
and in most cases, our out point is in the
routes. But if something were to go wrong,
then after our error handling middleware
is going to kick in, and I can show you
how to use that. We'll be doing it a lot,
but if we go to our storeController, and
maybe even before next,
we were to say, if(req.name === 'Wes')
then we could simply just throw
Error('That is a stupid name').
And then when we refresh this, go to our
home, say That is a stupid name.
And then it tells us on storeController.js
line 4, right here,
that's where the error happened, and then
it gives us information,
this is called a stack trace here is what
led up until this error.
Most cases, you just need a couple lines
to figure out what happened,
and then we display the actual error. If
this was in production,
you would not see the stack trace here,
you would just see the specific error that
happened. The user would see that. So in
this case, the next never got called.
Why? Because an error was thrown and then
our middleware picked it up,
and our development error handler figured
it out. I just did a little find and
replace on the file names here, just
because I hate looking at these stack
traces and I find that if you highlight
them, it can tell you really quickly where
you need to look, and more often that not,
you accidentally misspelled something or
did a semicolon in the wrong spot.
So that's sort of a high level, and don't
worry too too much if that doesn't make a
whole lot of sense, just because this is
all theoretical. I think,
at least for me, where this starts to
click in is when we actually start to put
it into use. So let's get doing that.
♪ [music] ♪